.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" This manual page was written by Ka Ho Ng under sponsorship from
.\" the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 27, 2021
.Dt VNODE_PAGER_PURGE_RANGE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vnode_pager_purge_range
.Nd "invalidate the content of the given range in bytes from cache"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_extern.h
.Ft void
.Fo vnode_pager_purge_range
.Fa "struct vnode *vp"
.Fa "vm_ooffset_t startoff"
.Fa "vm_ooffset_t endoff"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
invalidates content of the cache covered by the given range from the
specified vnode
.Fa vp .
The range to be purged is
.Eo [
.Fa startoff , endoff
.Ec ) .
Pages within the specified range will be removed from the object queue.
If
.Fa startoff
or
.Fa endoff
is not aligned to page boundaries,
partial-page area is zeroed.
.Pp
In case the vnode
.Fa vp
does not have a VM object allocated, the effect of calling this function is no-op.
.Sh LOCKS
The vnode should be locked on entry and will still be locked on exit.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 14 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Ka Ho Ng Aq Mt khng@FreeBSD.org .
